What's the value to a scientist to be established
at an institution like Scripps? A value to a
scientist? Right. Let me, the question's poorly
phrased. Usually you think of a scientist working
out of a very traditional department, that is,
department of geophysics or what have you. But
here there seems to be a mixture of scientists
working in and around the ocean. Is that a
particular value to a scientist doing research?
Well, I think
sometimes, yes, the value, I think, is from the
sharing of information from various
disciplines. So that a scientist that scripts,
and I think this is true in general of
oceanographic institution, is that the science
is not as compartmentalize in oceanography as it
might be in a more traditional university where
you have departments of physics, chemistry,
mathematics, in which a man might
carry out his entire scientific career in one
fairly narrow field. Oceanography doesn't have
these sharp boundaries, and when One sees that
right from the beginning when you go to sea and
share the use of a ship with many other
disciplines. And so that, in a sense, is an
advantage. It's a broadening experience to work
in an oceanographic institution. Now, were you
the driving force behind the Operation Mid-Pack?
I wouldn't say I was the driving force. I think The
most important person in MIDPAC was Roger Bell. He
was the leader of the expedition. I was, my
function, I remember, I was chairman of what they
called a joint planning committee. We had the, we
wanted to have a two-ship expedition.
That was mainly my interest because I wanted to do
seismic refreshment work before I had a two-ship.
Scripps Institution only had one ocean-going
ship. That was the Horizon. There was a similar
interest in doing oceanographic
exploration, geophysical, at the Naval
Electronics Lab. So we got together. This was
largely through the efforts of Roger Revelle. and
formed a joint expedition of the two
laboratories. And my function there was to be
chairman of a committee where we met about once a
week for several months before the cruise to
discuss what we were going to do.
Was the Mid-Pac Expedition related to the later
Nor-Pac Expedition? I don't believe so, except
the name.
NORPAC was an area describing an expedition
studying the North Pacific. The MIDPAC was
studying the Mid-Pacific. But I don't believe
they were too directly related. I had nothing to do
with NORPAC. What sort of information about the
Well, there were a variety of projects done. It's
hard for me to remember all of the things that were
done. There were several projects studying the
morphology of the ocean bottom through echo
sounding. We were doing studies of ocean bottom
structures through seismic refraction methods.
expedition to study heat flow also. Of course,
bottom coring was very important. The first time
we used the piston core, we had a kind of a new device
at that time developed by Kuhlenberg, a Swedish
oceanographer. So we had piston cores. We had
gravity cores. and taking samples of the
seafloor, taking temperature probes, and a
variety of things. It would be hard for me just
informally like this to really summarize the
whole thing, but in a way it was a model for many
expeditions to come later on, like Capricorn and
other expeditions. That was exactly what I was
interested in, was this idea of it being a model for
later expeditions, how it's usually
characterized. What did it do in your particular
research? What direction did it take you after
mid-pack? Oh, I think it demonstrated, let's say
it demonstrated for us for the first time that we
could go out and do, use seismic refraction
methods to let's say to learn about the structure
of down to the upper mantle and so it there was quite
a lot of new information
gained in mid-pack which certainly justified us
continuing it to other oceans other parts of the
ocean to see if what we learned on MITPAC was
typical of the ocean, and what the differences of
similarities were. So in that sense, the success
of MITPAC did stimulate work and the continuing
work in my field as well as in many other fields.
It's really like the study of... of the heat flow
from the ocean bottom, for example. The initial
results on mid-pack were very important in
encouraging further work in that field.
Do you enjoy the actual expeditions of
oceanography more so than the theoretical and
laboratory work? Yes, I
enjoy... out at sea more than interpreting the
data. Excuse
me. Now, what do you consider your most important
accomplishment in oceanography?
Oh, gee. Oh, I guess maybe what I've done in in the
general field of moho hunting or seismic
refraction studies of ocean structure. In terms
of the length of time I've spent in doing that and
the quantity of data in the archives.
Would you explain what elastic anastrophe is?
Anisotropy. Is it anisoptery? Anisotropy.
Right. Yeah, well, that's really part. Let's see,
I guess you're referring to something which is
really part of this study I'm mentioning of the
ocean bottom structure. In that study, we measure
the velocity of the waves under the ocean bottom.
The objective of this work has always been mainly
to achieve penetration through the crustal
rocks, which form sort of a thin veneer over the
bulk of the earth, to penetrate through that crust
into the real earth material, the mantle. The
great bulk of the earth is called the mantle.
That's the solid exterior of the earth that's
about 3,000 to 4,000 kilometers thick and lies
above the molten core.
We found that the velocity of this mantle, the
upper part of the mantle right below the crust,
that its velocity depended on direction of
travel.
And in other words, it was not isotropic.
Isotropic means that the properties are the same
regardless of what direction, but it's
anisotropic. And a good deal of our work here in the
last few years has been studying this anisotropy,
attempting to measure it and, if possible, learn
something about what causes it. Well, why did you
hypothesize about the upper mantle of the ocean in
terms of exhibiting it? Was there any clue you had
that the upper mantle might exhibit this? The idea
that it was anisotropic came not from our work, but
from other people. The principal one here is Harry
Hess, who studied anisotropy of the rocks that are
believed to be typical of the rocks that come from
the upper mantle. He was a geologist, one of his
specialties. He was a very broad-thinking
geologist, but one of his specialties was
studying these rocks in a microscope. These were
samples of rocks that came from various places
where it was believed that they were extruded by
volcanic process from deep down in the earth, and
therefore represented . Those, when you look at
them in a microscope, you can see that the grains in
a specimen, say a small specimen of the size of a few
centimeters, that the grains in that specimen are
not oriented at random, but are lined up. And this
interested him all Many years ago, he studied this
anisotropy
in the little sample. And so
he was aware of this anisotropy in small samples,
the thing that was startling about this
anisotropy was that it occurred over long
distances hundreds of thousands of miles lined up
in order it wasn't surprising to anybody that
you'd find this anisotropy in a small material
because the crystals that make up the uh the type of
material that forms the earth crest are
anisotropic crystals the crystals are not don't
have a simple cubical structure, but have a more
complex structure. So both the index of
refraction, that's the speed of light through the
crystal, and the speed of sound, speed of elastic
waves, both of these depend on the direction of
propagation through the crystal. So if the
crystals then are lined up, over a long distance,
then you get an effect of velocity being in
different directions, similar to what we observe
in our seismic experiment. Well, how is this
related to sea floor spreading?
There is an experimental relation
we have found is that the direction
of maximum velocity is in the direction that sea
floor was spreading at the time the rock was
formed. So the obvious conclusion here is that the
process of the rock being formed at the time the
ocean bottom was spreading apart In the process of
formation, the crystals are lined up. Now, the
details of how this happened are not known, but
there's a clue to that in the observation that the
maximum direction of maximum velocity is in the
direction of spreading.
And we observed that first in the area right off
California, where the sea is bottom that's
directly west of here is formed by east-west
spreading, roughly. It's not exactly east-west.
And we've found that when we first observed this,
that the maximum velocity was roughly east-west.
And it turns out that if we compare it in detail with
the estimated the direction of spreading. Then it
agrees almost exactly at 90 degrees by making its
first statistical study of all of the stations
within the area and comparing the velocity with
its direction with the direction of
the direction that it was moving at the time it was
formed. You understand? So this is all fairly
recent, too. It's all in the process of...
In fact, we have a paper in the press right now
that's just being submitted to the Geophysical
Research Letter giving the latest study of what
I'm talking about here. So it's a fairly complex
study, and it's going on now, isn't it? And all the
answers aren't in yet. But this has been generally
the continuous direction of your work the last
several years? Yeah, anisotropy is part of it. The
study of, the whole study of structure, say the
velocity structure and how it's related to the
geology of the area is continuing also.
Anisotropy is certainly part of it. How did you as
an American scientist find yourself on the
Russian vessels, and how well did you function
there? You seem to know quite a bit already. I have
been invited to
participate in some Russian oceanographic
ships, and
that's through I guess my acquaintance with
Russian scientists initially was the reason I...
Actually, it was associated with anisotropy
because both times I went aboard a Russian ship,
they were conducting experiments to measure
anisotropy.
But these were people that I knew previously
before I really got into this field of study of
anisotropy. So
let's see, the field that we're in, you see, is an
international field in which many countries
participate. And the Russians are Russian
geophysicists, oceanographers, are very active
in it, very well supported by the Soviet
government. How did you meet the Russian
scientist?
Well, there were two occasions where I had good
contact. One was a meeting which took place at UCLA
in 1963.
to discuss the results of the International
Geophysical Year. And this meeting was held just
before the
international meeting of the IUGG,
International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics,
which meets periodically every three years.
1963, it met in Berkeley. Before that, there was a
meeting at UCLA to discuss the results of the
International Geophysical Year. The Russians
sent large delegations to both meetings. It was at
a time when Russia was opening up, sending people
abroad for the first time, and a number of people
that I knew only through scientific reputation
and came to this meeting. And some of these people
were people who were participating in this
oceanographic work that I participated in at sea
with them. But so my direct contact with them began
here in 1963, and then later they had an
International Oceanographic Congress in
Moscow, 1966.
And I went to that and met and made contacts again
with some of the same people that came over here in
the summer of 1963. And then
from that came the suggestion that you go on this
vessel? Well, then I was invited, actually, by
Udinsev, an
oceanographer at the Institute of Oceanology in
Moscow, who was one of those that came over in 1963.
I met UCLA. As a matter of fact, I invited three of
them to come down with me to La Jolla And they
visited me in my home and got to see Scripps
Institution of Oceanography. And then the three
of us, the three Russians, wife and I, drove up to
Berkeley to the meeting together. We established
it was not only a good scientific contact, but a
friendly one as well, so I remained friends. One is
a man, Gleb Udintsev, who has been a leader of quite
a number of Russian oceanographic expeditions,
and he has invited me to go on two of them. Well, he's
invited me to go on more, but two of them I was able to
go on. Did you
have any problem, by the way, receiving clearance
to go on the oceanographic vessels? The Russian
oceanographic vessels. Not that I... I suppose
there may have been a problem in,
let's say, a local Russian problem in issuing me
the invitation. I don't know. I was never aware of
that.
Let's see, I... I think I usually receive the
invitation through some official letter through
the Academy of Sciences or through the director of
the Institute of Oceanology or something like
that. But previously, I've always had sort of an
informal invitation if I could. Udintsev travels
quite a bit. He visits. He comes here to look. For
example, he is the Russian who is... essentially
in charge of the Russian participation in the
deep-sea drilling project. If you're aware of the
deep-sea drilling project, you're aware. And
Russia is a participant in that. They contribute a
million dollars a year or something like that. I
don't know exactly what it is. But they
participate, not only as scientists that go
aboard the Glomar Challenger on these cruises,
but they also contribute money to it. This man I'm
talking about that's my friend is the principal
Russian dealing with the Russian part of
participation in that deep-sea drilling
project. So he comes here fairly frequently, not
only being on the committee, but because he has
participated in the drilling legs of the deep-sea
drilling project. So some of these invitations I
get, informally to me when he comes through and
says he's going to have an expedition so-and-so is
going to be on it would I be interested in joining it
okay later on then I may get a letter from from the
some more official letter inviting me there may be
some problems of Russian but I was never aware of
any problems did you speak Russian I don't speak
Russian no So I do have difficulties aboard ship.
However, not very serious because the Russians,
really it's necessary for them to know English
because in order for them to publish and have their
work known abroad, which they're very anxious to
do, they have to have some knowledge of English,
not only to have their articles printed in foreign
journals, but to be able to keep up with the
literature. And in this field, it's obligatory
for them to know English. So I had no trouble
communicating with the scientific party on ship.
My main problem was with the crew. The crew members
couldn't speak English. But with the scientific
part, there was no problem. Do you notice any
particular difference in approach to science and
oceanography from the point of view of the
Russians vis-a-vis ourselves? Oh, I guess so,
sure. Every nationality has some difference in
attitudes towards things
and so on. Not basically, though. I think... what
we're doing what the Russians are doing is an
international science and we may I think we have
we're technologically ahead of the Russians in
many ways we have much better computers than they
do for example but basically it's the same we're
all working the same field there's no real
fundamental differences and And I go aboard their
ship, and they're doing the same thing. They're
towing long streamers behind the ship. They have
air guns banging away, and they have
magnetometers going, and they're shooting
explosives through seismic refraction. And they
have temperature, measuring heat flow in ocean
bottom, taking cores. And with pretty impressive
facilities, too. I mean, a lot of support, big
ships, 70 people in a scientific party. So there's
a lot of similarity and differences, too. Sure,
there's bound to be differences. It's been
suggested to me that possibly the oceanography
projects in the Soviet Union are better funded
than ours. Would you agree with that? Well, in some
sense, I suppose, relative to the per capita gross
national product, I'm sure it's better funded.
Because, well, let's say they have these big ships
that certainly cost a lot more money in dollars to
operate than ours do, because they're much
smaller. And they have... a large, as I say, a large
scientific party, and so on and so on. It's very
hard to compare funding in the Soviet Union with
funding in the U.S., I think, in terms of dollars
and rubles, things like that. But I think in terms
of
man-hours expended in the field relative to a per
capita gross national product, It's more than we
do, more than we do, yeah. But whether they really
get more result, I don't think they get any more
better result, probably not quite as good.